Angelica is a genus of about 50 species of tall biennial and perennial herbs in the family Apiaceae, native to temperate and subarctic regions of the Northern Hemisphere, reaching as far North as Iceland and Lapland. They grow to 1-2 m tall, with large bipinnate leaves and large compound umbels of white or greenish-white flowers .
Species
Angelica ampla - Giant Angelica
Angelica archangelica - Garden Angelica, Archangel, Angelique
Angelica arguta - Lyall's Angelica
Angelica atropurpurea - Purplestem Angelica, Alexanders
Angelica breweri - Brewer's Angelica
Angelica californica - California Angelica
Angelica callii - Call's Angelica
Angelica canbyi - Canby's Angelica
Angelica cartilaginomarginata
Angelica dahurica - bai zhi in Chinese
Angelica dawsonii - Dawson's Angelica
Angelica dentata - Coastalplain Angelica
Angelica genuflexa - Kneeling Angelica
Angelica gigas
Angelica gigas - Cham dangwi in Korean
Angelica glabra - synonym for Angelica dahurica
Angelica grayi - Gray's Angelica
Angelica hendersonii - Henderson's Angelica
Angelica kingii - King's Angelica
Angelica lineariloba - Poison Angelica
Angelica lucida - Seacoast Angelica
Angelica pachyacarpa
Angelica palustris
Angelica pinnata - Small-leaf Angelica
Angelica pubescens
Angelica roseana - Rose Angelica
Angelica sinensis - Dong quai
Angelica scabrida - Charleston Mountain Angelica
Angelica sylvestris - Wild Angelica
Angelica tomentosa - Woolly Angelica
Angelica triquinata - Filmy Angelica
Angelica venosa - Hairy Angelica
Angelica wheeleri - Utah Angelica
### Cultivation and uses
Some members are grown as a flavoring agent and for their medicinal properties. The most notable of these is Garden Angelica ( A. archangelica ) which is commonly known just as Angelica . Natives of Lapland use the fleshy roots as food and the stalks as medicine. Crystallized strips of young angelica stems and midribs are green in colour and are sold as decorative and flavoursome cake decoration material. The roots and seeds are sometimes employed to flavor gin and Chartreuse.
Seacoast Angelica ( A. lucida ) has been eaten as a sort of "wild celery ".
A. sylvestris and some other species are eaten by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including Bordered Pug, Grey Pug, Lime-speck Pug and The V-Pug.
A. dawsonii was used by several first nations in North America for ritual purposes
A. atropurpurea is found in North America from Newfoundland west to Wisconsin and south to Maryland and was smoked by Missouri tribes for colds and respiratory ailments. This species is very similar in appearance to the poisonous water hemlock