The Bushbuck (Tragelaphus scriptus) is an antelope that is found in forest and woodland throughout Sub-Saharan Africa.Bushbuck stand about 90 centimetres at the shoulder and weigh from 30 to 80 kilograms (depending on sex). Bushbuck have a light brown coat, with up to seven white stripes and white splotches on the sides. The muzzle is also white. Horns are found only on the males and they can reach over half a metre with only one twist.Bushbuck are found in all types of bush, from open forest to dense  woodland. They eat mainly  grass but supplement their diet with any other plant matter they can reach. Bushbuck are active around 24 hours a day but tend to be  nocturnal near human habitations. Bushbuck tend to be  solitary, though some live in pairs.All bushbucks live within a "home" area they will not normally leave this area, which is usually around 50,000 square metres on the savannah and much larger in the forest. These areas usually overlap other bushbuck home areas. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bushbuck"




Bushbuck stand about 90 centimetres at the shoulder and weigh from 30 to 80 kilograms (depending on sex). Bushbuck have a light brown coat, with up to seven white stripes and white splotches on the sides. The muzzle is also white. Horns are found only on the males and they can reach over half a metre with only one twist.Bushbuck are found in all types of bush, from open forest to dense  woodland. They eat mainly  grass but supplement their diet with any other plant matter they can reach. Bushbuck are active around 24 hours a day but tend to be  nocturnal near human habitations. Bushbuck tend to be  solitary, though some live in pairs.All bushbucks live within a "home" area they will not normally leave this area, which is usually around 50,000 square metres on the savannah and much larger in the forest. These areas usually overlap other bushbuck home areas. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bushbuck"




Bushbuck are found in all types of bush, from open forest to dense  woodland. They eat mainly  grass but supplement their diet with any other plant matter they can reach. Bushbuck are active around 24 hours a day but tend to be  nocturnal near human habitations. Bushbuck tend to be  solitary, though some live in pairs.All bushbucks live within a "home" area they will not normally leave this area, which is usually around 50,000 square metres on the savannah and much larger in the forest. These areas usually overlap other bushbuck home areas. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bushbuck"




All bushbucks live within a "home" area they will not normally leave this area, which is usually around 50,000 square metres on the savannah and much larger in the forest. These areas usually overlap other bushbuck home areas. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bushbuck"



