Corn oil is  oil extracted from the  germ of corn (maize). Its main use is in cooking, where its high  smoke point makes it a valuable  frying oil. It is also a key ingredient in some  margarines. Corn oil has a milder taste and is less expensive than most other types of  vegetable oils.One  bushel of corn contains 1.55  pounds of corn oil (28  kg/ Mg). Corn  agronomists have developed high-oil varieties, however, these varieties tend to show lower field yields, so they are not universally accepted by growers. Refined corn oil is 99%  triglyceride, with proportions of approximately 59% polyunsaturated fatty acid, 24% monounsaturated fatty acid, and 13% saturated fatty acid.Corn oil is also one source of biodiesel. Biodiesel is commonly made from soybeans, but as corn oil refining technology improves, it will become a greater source of biodiesel and a backup source in case of large-scale soybean crop failures. Other industrial uses for corn oil include  soap,  salve,  paint,  rustproofing for metal surfaces,  inks, textiles, and  insecticides. It is sometimes used as a carrier for drug molecules in  pharmaceutical preparations.The first commercial corn oil for cooking purposes was extracted in 1898 and 1899 by machinery invented by  Theodore Hudnut and  Benjamin Hudnut of the  Hudnut Hominy Company of  Terre Haute, Indiana, and called "mazoil." Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corn_oil"




One  bushel of corn contains 1.55  pounds of corn oil (28  kg/ Mg). Corn  agronomists have developed high-oil varieties, however, these varieties tend to show lower field yields, so they are not universally accepted by growers. Refined corn oil is 99%  triglyceride, with proportions of approximately 59% polyunsaturated fatty acid, 24% monounsaturated fatty acid, and 13% saturated fatty acid.Corn oil is also one source of biodiesel. Biodiesel is commonly made from soybeans, but as corn oil refining technology improves, it will become a greater source of biodiesel and a backup source in case of large-scale soybean crop failures. Other industrial uses for corn oil include  soap,  salve,  paint,  rustproofing for metal surfaces,  inks, textiles, and  insecticides. It is sometimes used as a carrier for drug molecules in  pharmaceutical preparations.The first commercial corn oil for cooking purposes was extracted in 1898 and 1899 by machinery invented by  Theodore Hudnut and  Benjamin Hudnut of the  Hudnut Hominy Company of  Terre Haute, Indiana, and called "mazoil." Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corn_oil"




Corn oil is also one source of biodiesel. Biodiesel is commonly made from soybeans, but as corn oil refining technology improves, it will become a greater source of biodiesel and a backup source in case of large-scale soybean crop failures. Other industrial uses for corn oil include  soap,  salve,  paint,  rustproofing for metal surfaces,  inks, textiles, and  insecticides. It is sometimes used as a carrier for drug molecules in  pharmaceutical preparations.The first commercial corn oil for cooking purposes was extracted in 1898 and 1899 by machinery invented by  Theodore Hudnut and  Benjamin Hudnut of the  Hudnut Hominy Company of  Terre Haute, Indiana, and called "mazoil." Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corn_oil"




The first commercial corn oil for cooking purposes was extracted in 1898 and 1899 by machinery invented by  Theodore Hudnut and  Benjamin Hudnut of the  Hudnut Hominy Company of  Terre Haute, Indiana, and called "mazoil." Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corn_oil"




 Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corn_oil"



