The Goldcrest Regulus regulus is a very small  passerine bird in the  kinglet family, resembling the Firecrest but with a plainer face. It breeds in most of temperate Europe and Asia but is partly migratory and northern birds winter south of the breeding range. It prefers  coniferous woodlands, although it has a wider range in winter, when it is often found with  tit flocks. It builds an open  nest and lays 4-12  eggs.The Goldcrest is the smallest European bird, measuring from 8.5 to 9.5cm. It is dull greenish above, with buffy white underparts, two white wingbars, a plain face with a conspicuous black eye. The crown has black sides and a narrow black front, and a bright central crest, orange in the male and yellow in the female, which is displayed during breeding. It is a restless species, constantly on the move as it searches for insects.Goldcrests on the  Canary Islands have a broader black band across the forehead, and yellower wingbars and belong to separate  subspecies. They are sometimes considered a separate species, but usually are included in the goldcrest. Recently, it has been established that there are in fact two distant Canary Islands populations: the  Tenerife Goldcrest (R. (r.) teneriffae) and the  Western Canary Islands Goldcrest (R. (r.) ellenthalerae) (Päckert et al., 2006).The Goldcrest is the national bird of Luxembourg. In Britain, Goldcrests were previously called Gold-crested Wrens, and are celebrated in a poem by  Charles Tennyson Turner with that title. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goldcrest"




The Goldcrest is the smallest European bird, measuring from 8.5 to 9.5cm. It is dull greenish above, with buffy white underparts, two white wingbars, a plain face with a conspicuous black eye. The crown has black sides and a narrow black front, and a bright central crest, orange in the male and yellow in the female, which is displayed during breeding. It is a restless species, constantly on the move as it searches for insects.Goldcrests on the  Canary Islands have a broader black band across the forehead, and yellower wingbars and belong to separate  subspecies. They are sometimes considered a separate species, but usually are included in the goldcrest. Recently, it has been established that there are in fact two distant Canary Islands populations: the  Tenerife Goldcrest (R. (r.) teneriffae) and the  Western Canary Islands Goldcrest (R. (r.) ellenthalerae) (Päckert et al., 2006).The Goldcrest is the national bird of Luxembourg. In Britain, Goldcrests were previously called Gold-crested Wrens, and are celebrated in a poem by  Charles Tennyson Turner with that title. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goldcrest"




Goldcrests on the  Canary Islands have a broader black band across the forehead, and yellower wingbars and belong to separate  subspecies. They are sometimes considered a separate species, but usually are included in the goldcrest. Recently, it has been established that there are in fact two distant Canary Islands populations: the  Tenerife Goldcrest (R. (r.) teneriffae) and the  Western Canary Islands Goldcrest (R. (r.) ellenthalerae) (Päckert et al., 2006).The Goldcrest is the national bird of Luxembourg. In Britain, Goldcrests were previously called Gold-crested Wrens, and are celebrated in a poem by  Charles Tennyson Turner with that title. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goldcrest"




The Goldcrest is the national bird of Luxembourg. In Britain, Goldcrests were previously called Gold-crested Wrens, and are celebrated in a poem by  Charles Tennyson Turner with that title. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goldcrest"



