Gynostemma pentaphyllum, also called Jiaogulan (Chinese:  绞 股 蓝;  pinyin: jiǎogǔlán) or Southern ginseng, is an  herbaceous  vine of the family  Cucurbitaceae ( cucumber or  gourd family) indigenous to the southern reaches of China.The plant is best known for its use as an  herbal medicine in  traditional Chinese medicine. It is described by the local people as the immortality herb, because people within the  Guizhou Province, where jiaogulan tea is drunk regularly, have a history of living to a very old age.It was used as a natural sweetener in Japan and is known as an  adaptogen and  antioxidant. Due to its adaptogenic effects it is frequently referred to as "Southern Ginseng." Its adaptogenic constituents are  gypenosides which are closely structurally related to the  ginsenosides from the well known medicinal plant  ginseng. It is also purported to lower  cholesterol levels.Jiaogulan is a vine hardy to  USDA zone 8 in which it may grow as a short lived  perennial plant; in lower zones it can be grown as an annual. The plant is dioecious, meaning each plant exists either as male or female, thus if seeds are desired both a male and female plant must be grown.Other names for jiaogulan include amachazuru, Gynostemma pentaphyllum, Miracle Grass, Southern Ginseng, Vitis pentaphyllum, and Xianxao. One U.S.-based company markets jiaogulan under the name "Panta," but this name does not seem to be derived from any Asian language; instead, the name most likely comes from the plant's Latin name. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jiaogulan"




The plant is best known for its use as an  herbal medicine in  traditional Chinese medicine. It is described by the local people as the immortality herb, because people within the  Guizhou Province, where jiaogulan tea is drunk regularly, have a history of living to a very old age.It was used as a natural sweetener in Japan and is known as an  adaptogen and  antioxidant. Due to its adaptogenic effects it is frequently referred to as "Southern Ginseng." Its adaptogenic constituents are  gypenosides which are closely structurally related to the  ginsenosides from the well known medicinal plant  ginseng. It is also purported to lower  cholesterol levels.Jiaogulan is a vine hardy to  USDA zone 8 in which it may grow as a short lived  perennial plant; in lower zones it can be grown as an annual. The plant is dioecious, meaning each plant exists either as male or female, thus if seeds are desired both a male and female plant must be grown.Other names for jiaogulan include amachazuru, Gynostemma pentaphyllum, Miracle Grass, Southern Ginseng, Vitis pentaphyllum, and Xianxao. One U.S.-based company markets jiaogulan under the name "Panta," but this name does not seem to be derived from any Asian language; instead, the name most likely comes from the plant's Latin name. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jiaogulan"




It was used as a natural sweetener in Japan and is known as an  adaptogen and  antioxidant. Due to its adaptogenic effects it is frequently referred to as "Southern Ginseng." Its adaptogenic constituents are  gypenosides which are closely structurally related to the  ginsenosides from the well known medicinal plant  ginseng. It is also purported to lower  cholesterol levels.Jiaogulan is a vine hardy to  USDA zone 8 in which it may grow as a short lived  perennial plant; in lower zones it can be grown as an annual. The plant is dioecious, meaning each plant exists either as male or female, thus if seeds are desired both a male and female plant must be grown.Other names for jiaogulan include amachazuru, Gynostemma pentaphyllum, Miracle Grass, Southern Ginseng, Vitis pentaphyllum, and Xianxao. One U.S.-based company markets jiaogulan under the name "Panta," but this name does not seem to be derived from any Asian language; instead, the name most likely comes from the plant's Latin name. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jiaogulan"




Jiaogulan is a vine hardy to  USDA zone 8 in which it may grow as a short lived  perennial plant; in lower zones it can be grown as an annual. The plant is dioecious, meaning each plant exists either as male or female, thus if seeds are desired both a male and female plant must be grown.Other names for jiaogulan include amachazuru, Gynostemma pentaphyllum, Miracle Grass, Southern Ginseng, Vitis pentaphyllum, and Xianxao. One U.S.-based company markets jiaogulan under the name "Panta," but this name does not seem to be derived from any Asian language; instead, the name most likely comes from the plant's Latin name. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jiaogulan"




Other names for jiaogulan include amachazuru, Gynostemma pentaphyllum, Miracle Grass, Southern Ginseng, Vitis pentaphyllum, and Xianxao. One U.S.-based company markets jiaogulan under the name "Panta," but this name does not seem to be derived from any Asian language; instead, the name most likely comes from the plant's Latin name. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jiaogulan"



