The Lindisfarne Gospels is an  illuminated Latin manuscript of the  gospels of  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke and  John. The manuscript was produced on  Lindisfarne in  Northumbria in the late 7th century or early 8th century, and is generally regarded as the finest example of the kingdom's unique style of religious art, a style that combined Anglo-Saxon and Celtic themes, what is now called  Hiberno-Saxon art, or  Insular art.The Lindisfarne Gospels are presumed to be the work of a monk named  Eadfrith, who became  Bishop of Lindisfarne in  698 and died in  721. Current scholarship indicates a date around  715, and it is believed they were produced in honour of  St. Cuthbert. The Gospels are richly illustrated in the insular style, and were originally encased in a fine leather binding covered with jewels and metals made by Billfrith the  Anchorite in the 8th century. During the Viking raids on Lindisfarne, however, this cover was lost, and a replacement made in  1852. The text is written in  insular script.In the 10th century an Old English translation of the Gospels was made: a word-for-word  gloss inserted between the lines of the Latin text by  Aldred, Provost of  Chester-le-Street. This is the first translation of the Gospels into the English language.The Gospels were taken from Durham Cathedral during the dissolution of the monasteries, ordered by Henry VIII, and were acquired in the early 17th century by  Sir Robert Cotton from  Robert Bowyer,  Clerk of the Parliaments.  Cotton's library came to the  British Museum in the 18th century, and from there to the  British Library in London.A campaign exists to have the gospels brought back to Durham Cathedral in the North East of England, a move vigorously opposed by the British Library. A modern facsimile copy of the Gospels is now housed in the  Cathedral Treasury at Durham, which can be seen by visitors. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindisfarne_Gospels"




The Lindisfarne Gospels are presumed to be the work of a monk named  Eadfrith, who became  Bishop of Lindisfarne in  698 and died in  721. Current scholarship indicates a date around  715, and it is believed they were produced in honour of  St. Cuthbert. The Gospels are richly illustrated in the insular style, and were originally encased in a fine leather binding covered with jewels and metals made by Billfrith the  Anchorite in the 8th century. During the Viking raids on Lindisfarne, however, this cover was lost, and a replacement made in  1852. The text is written in  insular script.In the 10th century an Old English translation of the Gospels was made: a word-for-word  gloss inserted between the lines of the Latin text by  Aldred, Provost of  Chester-le-Street. This is the first translation of the Gospels into the English language.The Gospels were taken from Durham Cathedral during the dissolution of the monasteries, ordered by Henry VIII, and were acquired in the early 17th century by  Sir Robert Cotton from  Robert Bowyer,  Clerk of the Parliaments.  Cotton's library came to the  British Museum in the 18th century, and from there to the  British Library in London.A campaign exists to have the gospels brought back to Durham Cathedral in the North East of England, a move vigorously opposed by the British Library. A modern facsimile copy of the Gospels is now housed in the  Cathedral Treasury at Durham, which can be seen by visitors. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindisfarne_Gospels"




In the 10th century an Old English translation of the Gospels was made: a word-for-word  gloss inserted between the lines of the Latin text by  Aldred, Provost of  Chester-le-Street. This is the first translation of the Gospels into the English language.The Gospels were taken from Durham Cathedral during the dissolution of the monasteries, ordered by Henry VIII, and were acquired in the early 17th century by  Sir Robert Cotton from  Robert Bowyer,  Clerk of the Parliaments.  Cotton's library came to the  British Museum in the 18th century, and from there to the  British Library in London.A campaign exists to have the gospels brought back to Durham Cathedral in the North East of England, a move vigorously opposed by the British Library. A modern facsimile copy of the Gospels is now housed in the  Cathedral Treasury at Durham, which can be seen by visitors. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindisfarne_Gospels"




The Gospels were taken from Durham Cathedral during the dissolution of the monasteries, ordered by Henry VIII, and were acquired in the early 17th century by  Sir Robert Cotton from  Robert Bowyer,  Clerk of the Parliaments.  Cotton's library came to the  British Museum in the 18th century, and from there to the  British Library in London.A campaign exists to have the gospels brought back to Durham Cathedral in the North East of England, a move vigorously opposed by the British Library. A modern facsimile copy of the Gospels is now housed in the  Cathedral Treasury at Durham, which can be seen by visitors. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindisfarne_Gospels"




A campaign exists to have the gospels brought back to Durham Cathedral in the North East of England, a move vigorously opposed by the British Library. A modern facsimile copy of the Gospels is now housed in the  Cathedral Treasury at Durham, which can be seen by visitors. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindisfarne_Gospels"




 Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindisfarne_Gospels"



