The Statue of Zeus at Olympia is one of the classical  Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. It was carved by the famed Classical sculptor  Phidias ( 5th century BC) circa  435 BC in  Olympia, Greece.The seated statue occupied the whole width of the aisle of the temple that was built to house it, and was 40 feet (12 meters) tall. "It seems that if Zeus were to stand up," the geographer  Strabo noted early in the 1st century BC, "he would unroof the temple." Zeus was a  chryselephantine sculpture, made of ivory and accented with gold plating. In the sculpture, he was seated on a magnificent throne of cedarwood, inlaid with ivory, gold, ebony, and precious stones. In Zeus' right hand there was a small statue of  Nike, the goddess of victory, and in his left hand, a shining sceptre on which an eagle perched. Visitors like the Roman general  Aemilius Paulus, the victor over Macedon, were moved to awe by the godlike majesty and splendor that Phidias had captured.The circumstances of its eventual destruction are a source of debate: some scholars argue that it perished with the temple in the 5th century AD, others argue that it was carried off to  Constantinople, where it was destroyed in the great fire of the  Lauseion (Schobel 1965). According to  Lucian of Samosata in the later second century, "they have laid hands on your person at Olympia, my lord High-Thunderer, and you had not the energy to wake the dogs or call in the neighbours; surely they might have come to the rescue and caught the fellows before they had finished packing up the swag."Perhaps the greatest  discovery in terms of finding out about this wonder came in  1958 with the excavation of the workshop used to create the statue. This has led archaeologists to be able to re-create the technique used to make the great work. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statue_of_Zeus_at_Olympia"




The seated statue occupied the whole width of the aisle of the temple that was built to house it, and was 40 feet (12 meters) tall. "It seems that if Zeus were to stand up," the geographer  Strabo noted early in the 1st century BC, "he would unroof the temple." Zeus was a  chryselephantine sculpture, made of ivory and accented with gold plating. In the sculpture, he was seated on a magnificent throne of cedarwood, inlaid with ivory, gold, ebony, and precious stones. In Zeus' right hand there was a small statue of  Nike, the goddess of victory, and in his left hand, a shining sceptre on which an eagle perched. Visitors like the Roman general  Aemilius Paulus, the victor over Macedon, were moved to awe by the godlike majesty and splendor that Phidias had captured.The circumstances of its eventual destruction are a source of debate: some scholars argue that it perished with the temple in the 5th century AD, others argue that it was carried off to  Constantinople, where it was destroyed in the great fire of the  Lauseion (Schobel 1965). According to  Lucian of Samosata in the later second century, "they have laid hands on your person at Olympia, my lord High-Thunderer, and you had not the energy to wake the dogs or call in the neighbours; surely they might have come to the rescue and caught the fellows before they had finished packing up the swag."Perhaps the greatest  discovery in terms of finding out about this wonder came in  1958 with the excavation of the workshop used to create the statue. This has led archaeologists to be able to re-create the technique used to make the great work. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statue_of_Zeus_at_Olympia"




The circumstances of its eventual destruction are a source of debate: some scholars argue that it perished with the temple in the 5th century AD, others argue that it was carried off to  Constantinople, where it was destroyed in the great fire of the  Lauseion (Schobel 1965). According to  Lucian of Samosata in the later second century, "they have laid hands on your person at Olympia, my lord High-Thunderer, and you had not the energy to wake the dogs or call in the neighbours; surely they might have come to the rescue and caught the fellows before they had finished packing up the swag."Perhaps the greatest  discovery in terms of finding out about this wonder came in  1958 with the excavation of the workshop used to create the statue. This has led archaeologists to be able to re-create the technique used to make the great work. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statue_of_Zeus_at_Olympia"




Perhaps the greatest  discovery in terms of finding out about this wonder came in  1958 with the excavation of the workshop used to create the statue. This has led archaeologists to be able to re-create the technique used to make the great work. Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statue_of_Zeus_at_Olympia"



