Weasels are mammals in the genus Mustela of the Mustelidae family. Originally, the name "weasel" was applied to one species of the genus, the European form of the Least Weasel ( Mustela nivalis ). Early literary references to weasels, for example their common appearances in fables, refer to this species rather than to the genus as a whole.
Weasels vary in length from 15 to 35 centimeters (6 to 14 inches), and usually have a light brown upper coat, white belly and black fur at the tip of the tail; in many species, populations living at high latitudes moult to a white coat with black fur at the tip of the tail in winter. They have long slender bodies, which enable them to follow their prey into burrows. Their tails are typically almost as long as the rest of their bodies. As is typical of small carnivores, weasels have a reputation for cleverness and guile.
Most weasels feed on small mammals, and in former times were considered vermin since some species took poultry from farms, or rabbits from commercial warrens. Some species of weasel have been reported to perform a "hypnotic dance" in front of prey, which appears to mesmerize it. In folklore at least, this behaviour is particularly associated with the stoat.
Of the 16 extant species currently classified in the genus Mustela , only 10 have "weasel" in their common name. Among those that do not are the stoat, the two species of mink, and the polecats or ferrets.
## Species of weasel
Subgenus Grammogale
Tropical Weasel, Mustela africana
Colombian Weasel, Mustela felipei
Subgenus Lutreola
European Mink, Mustela lutreola
Indonesian Mountain Weasel, Mustela lutreolina
Malayan Weasel, Mustela nudipes
Siberian Weasel, Mustela sibirica
Black-striped Weasel, Mustela strigidorsa
Subgenus Mustela
Mountain Weasel, Mustela altaica
Stoat, Mustela erminea
Long-tailed Weasel, Mustela frenata
Yellow-bellied Weasel, Mustela kathiah
Least Weasel, Mustela nivalis
Subgenus Putorius
Steppe Polecat, Mustela eversmannii
Black-footed Ferret, Mustela nigripes
European Polecat, Mustela putorius (includes the domestic ferret)
Subgenus Vison
Sea Mink, Mustela macrodon ( extinct in 1894)
American Mink, Mustela vison